Executive Summary
Introduction to the Employer Compliance Audit (ECA) Program
The mandate of the ECA Program is to maintain the integrity of the tax system with respect to employers’ reporting of employment income and taxable benefits, withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts, and proper characterization of workers, through a combination of taxpayer education and responsible enforcement. This program contributes to protecting $255 billion in source deductions annually. As in most organizations, employers in Canada manage payroll on behalf of their employees who assume that all source deductions and calculations are compliant with relevant laws. This makes ECA a one-to-many program, as its audits of employer reporting result in adjustments on multiple individual income tax (T1) accounts.
Overall, this evaluation found that the ECA Program:
Adequately discharges its mandate with respect to responsible enforcement.
Averages a high change rate (which is the percentage of audits that detected and corrected non-compliance) of approximately 80% annually.
Audits impact subsequent reporting compliance in a sustained manner several years after the audit.
Is the only program to address taxable benefits non-compliance with a budget of about $7.2M in fiscal year 2015-2016 and approximately 113 full-time equivalent (FTEs) employees in the regions, as well as 5 FTEs in Headquarters. PROTECTED
Faces noteworthy willful non-compliance within its target population.
With respect to taxable benefits, it was found that:
Reporting has increased significantly over the ten year period 2005-2014.
Different stakeholders bring different perspectives on how best to communicate guidelines on taxable benefits in the Canada Revenue Agency’s (CRA) guides. Those tasked with creating and editing them try to communicate principles and seek simplicity. However the payroll practitioners who do the calculations and the Business Enquiries Call Centre (BECC) agents who answer their calls seek specificity, clarity, and consistency.
There are many taxable benefits for payroll practitioners to understand and evidence shows that self-reported confidence in making these calculations drops for less commonly occurring benefits.
It is recommended that the:
Collections and Verifications Branch (CVB), Legislative Policy and Regulatory Affairs Branch (LPRAB), and Assessment, Benefit, and Service Branch (ABSB) work together to enhance the CRA’s payroll related phone and website supports.
CRA supports CVB in leading the process to include more guidelines surrounding the definition or substantiation of “reasonable” in the CRA taxable benefit guide.
With respect to the proper characterization of workers, it was found that:
Issuing T4A slips encourages compliance in the amount of T4A self-employed commissions reported; about one-third of independent contractors were found to have not reported income when they did not receive a T4A slip.
Approximately one-third of payroll practitioners surveyed acknowledged that they did not issue a T4A slip to report fees for service when they should have.
Finding relevant information was identified as a challenge by a higher proportion of payroll practitioners than was finding information for other payroll obligations.
The CRA guide states the CRA is not assessing penalties for failing to complete box 048, or reporting payments made by a person for "fees, commissions or other amounts for services". Some employers interpret this to mean that they are not obliged to complete this box on the T4A slip. There are two consequences to this interpretation: first, employers may not capture the Social Insurance Number (SIN) or other relevant identifier information of the worker; and second, ECA auditors may have trouble gathering the information necessary to complete the slips. These findings suggest that the current enforcement strategy for box 048 T4A slips is not cost effective.
PROTECTED
It is recommended that the:
CVB and LPRAB clarify employers’ obligations surrounding the filing of box 048 T4A slip, PROTECTED. 
ECA Program adopts more cost effective methods to enforce T4A slip reporting compliance PROTECTED
With respect to the federal tax portion of the Program’s calculated fiscal impact, it was found to be lower than the amounts determined by the Program due to:
PROTECTED
Increases to income identified by the audits having been already reported by the independent contractor or employee on their personal tax returns.
Using a tax rate of 29% when calculating federal tax results does not reflect the income tax rate paid by all individuals affected by the Program.
It is recommended that the:
ECA Program works with internal stakeholders to adopt assumptions that better reflect amounts that are being reassessed.
With respect to the collectability of the federal taxes assessed by the Program, it was found that:
The one-to-many structure of the ECA Program is unaligned with the individual level of analysis conducted by the Appeals Branch’s officers. One of the main reasons for the reversals of ECA results is the different level of analysis between the areas: ECA captures records from employers, Appeals from employees.
Affected taxpayers (employers, employees, and contractors) pay the majority of amounts owing with relatively little effort expended by Agency resources.
It is recommended that the:
The ECA Program and Appeals Branch mitigate the factors that contribute to the undesired impacts on ECA program outcomes and monitor the impact of these efforts.
The following factors were identified as challenges to ECA Program delivery:
Timeliness of training for new employees;
Communications between Headquarters and field, and cross-region communication; and
Timeliness of responses to technical and legislative enquiries, which may result in the premature closure of an audit nearing its statute bar dates.
It is recommended that the:
ECA Program addresses the timeliness and coordination of its support, training, and communication functions in order to improve consistency and responsiveness to the field.
1.0 Introduction
On April 9, 2015, the Employer Compliance Audit (ECA) Program evaluation framework was approved by the Management Audit and Evaluation Committee. The ECA Program evaluation study was included in the Risk-Based Audit and Evaluation Plan (RBAEP) 2013-2016 which was approved by the Board of management on September 17, 2013.
1.1 Background
The collection of personal income tax revenue through source deductions is a large source of government revenues. In 2014-2015 alone, the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) collected approximately $255 billion combined from Canada Pension Plan (CPP), Employment Insurance (EI), and federal and provincial income tax through source deductions remitted by over 1.1 million employers, representing approximately 70% of total revenues and pension contributions for the year. As such, ensuring compliance with these obligations is an important aspect of maintaining integrity in the Canadian tax system. Correct calculation of source deductions relies on the proper reporting of employment income and taxable benefits, withholding and remitting of CPP/EI amounts, and proper characterizations of workers. One program responsible for reviewing these three areas is the ECA Program which is part of the Employer Compliance Division in the Business Compliance Directorate of the Collections and Verification Branch (CVB). The ECA Program had a total annual budget of about $7.2 million in the 2015-2016 fiscal year and approximately 113 full time equivalent (FTE) employees in the regions, as well as 5 FTEs in Headquarters (HQ).
Canadian legislation places several obligations on employers. These obligations include requiring employers to deduct and withhold the employee’s share of personal income tax, as well as their combined portions of the CPP contributions and EI premiums. Those dollars are remitted on the employee’s behalf to the CRA. These payments, which are held in trust by the employer, are commonly known as “at source” deductions. Employers are tasked with identifying, calculating, and reporting taxable remuneration and premiums paid to employees on their Statement of Remuneration Paid slips (i.e. T4 slips) (Appendix 2). In the event of services rendered from another business (i.e. a contract worker), employers, as payers, are required to issue a Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income to contract workers ( i.e. T4A slips) (Appendix 3) to report the fees paid to these contractors.
In order to enforce these employer payroll obligations, the mandate of the ECA Program is to maintain the integrity of the tax system with respect to the reporting of employment income and taxable benefits; withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts; and, the proper characterization of workers, through a combination of taxpayer education and responsible enforcement.
The ECA Program promotes employer awareness and understanding of tax laws and obligations as provided in the Income Tax Act (ITA), the Excise Tax Act (ETA), the CPP, the Employment Insurance Act (EIA), and their respective regulations, to increase and enhance voluntary compliance.
The ECA Program can be characterized as a one-to-many program: an audit of one employer’s reporting can, depending on the size of the organization, impact the T4 slips of multiple employees. If employer reporting non-compliance is detected, this could affect many individual taxpayers working with that employer years after the individuals have filed their tax returns for a given tax year.
2.0 Issues, methods, and approach
This evaluation reports on two issues:
Outcomes achievement (section 3): The first issue highlights the outcomes achieved based on the ECA Program mandate to maintain the integrity of the tax system through both responsible enforcement (see section 3.1) and education (section 3.2).
CRA administrative effectiveness (section 4): The second evaluation issue assessed the overall administrative effectiveness. A taxpayer-centric view of the CRA was used to identify the main program areas that contribute directly or indirectly to facilitating compliance among the population targeted by the ECA Program. The main topics covered are the Program’s calculation of fiscal impact (section 4.1), collectability of the reassessed fiscal impact (section 4.2), and barriers and challenges to program delivery (section 4.3).
The main methods of analysis employed in support of this evaluation were:
data analysis of calculated fiscal impact between 2008-2009 and 2013-2014 fiscal years, with particular emphasis on 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 to allow 3 years for the program to complete its audits and for downstream results to be realized. This data included analysis on almost 100% of employers which issued a T-slip, and on matched T-slips created or amended as a result of an ECA audit;
online consultation that sampled 1,600 payroll practitioners from among organization members of the Canadian Payroll Association (CPA) in March 2016;
interviews with 40 ECA Program officials at all levels and across all regions and HQ, as well as interviews with numerous other CRA officials; and
review of documentation provided by various stakeholders and available on the CRA intranet and internet.
This report also contains findings that are outside of the ECA Program’s mandate in order to provide a more holistic view of the CRA’s administration of employer payroll obligations. The premise of such horizontal evaluations is that they take a taxpayer-centric approach, so that they can provide insight into multiple compliance outcomes rather than just the one for which the program being evaluated is accountable. This approach means that there is a need to:
recognize that there are upstream impacts, or stakeholders across the CRA which may affect the evaluated program’s ability to achieve its mandate; and
provide insight into the downstream impacts that the evaluated program could have on stakeholders within the Agency. For this evaluation, “downstream impacts” refers to the impact on post ECA audit processes and programs.
3.1 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through responsible enforcement
This section examines the core activities of the ECA Program, namely the impact its audits are having with respect to employers’:
reporting of employment income and taxable benefits (sections 3.1.2 – 3.1.4);
proper characterization of workers (sections 3.1.5 – 3.1.7); and
withholding and remitting of payroll related amounts (section 3.1.8).
3.1.1 The ECA Program covers all aspects of its mandate with respect to detecting and correcting reporting non-compliance.
In most organizations, employers manage payroll on behalf of their employees who assume that all source deductions and calculations are compliant with the relevant laws. As the ECA Program assesses employers’ reporting of workers’ compensation (income, benefits, and premiums), any change from the audit will create reassessments on the workers’ T1 accounts, including penalties and interest owed to the CRA. This means that aside from missing CPP/EI contributions, employers are not directly impacted by the audit results.
Figure 1 illustrates the annual volume of completed audits and the change rates. Between 2009-2010 and 2013-2014, the program conducted PROTECTED employer compliance audits per fiscal year, representing a coverage rate of approximately PROTECTED of the total target population. Since not all employers in Canada offer taxable benefits and incentives to their employees, the coverage rate for taxable benefits and incentives would be higher.
3.2 Maintaining the integrity of the tax system through education
The second element of the ECA Program mandate is the provision of educational support to enhance voluntary compliance.
This section also reviews the most commonly used CRA services by examining:
feedback received for both taxable benefits and T4A slips, how best to communicate clearly, and the ease of finding information in CRA guides and webpages;
website statistics;
telephone support service at the Business Enquiry Call Centres (BECC); and,
webinars.
3.2.1 The ECA Program provides minimal educational support beyond that which is achieved from the audit process.
While ECA Program officials considered audits to be the principal mechanism used to educate employers, their efficacy is limited largely to those who are audited, PROTECTED
CRA audits were cited by 6% of the consultation respondents as providing a source of information or explanation on their payroll related enquiries, and only a small group from those noted concerns with it as a source of information.
The ECA Program has implemented initiatives over the years with the objective of providing outreach and education to the employer population. However, ECA Program officials recognized that these activities did not provide significant coverage and there was limited, if any, follow up. Instead, most key payroll-related educational activities tend to occur in other CRA programs while the ECA Program plays an indirect role in the development of webpage and guide content. For example, in the course of an audit or review, if the ECA Program finds discrepancies or contradictions in the guides it informs relevant stakeholders within the Agency to action the necessary changes.
To facilitate reporting compliance, the CRA provides several resources to employers and their representatives, including telephone support, rulings and interpretations, and numerous guides and webinars all found on the CRA website. The following table highlights key CRA programs that support the ECA Program in facilitating understanding across the payroll community:
4.1 Calculating the fiscal impact
The key performance measure of the ECA Program is fiscal impact, which the Program calculates as the sum of:
federal taxes earned from increases to income found by the audit (approximately 80% of total fiscal impact per year);
provincial taxes earned from increases to income found by the audit (approximately 16% of total fiscal impact per year);
associated increased CPP/EI premiums (approximately 2% of total fiscal impact per year); and
resulting penalties and interests (approximately 1% of total fiscal impact per year).
The following analysis is based exclusively on the federal tax portion of the Program’s calculated fiscal impact, as it represents the majority of results (~80%) and it avoids potential complications in analyzing different provincial tax rates which may have an effect on overall results. For the sake of clarity, references to “fiscal impact” will be replaced with “federal tax” throughout this section.
T4 and T4A slips generated by ECA audits were analyzed over two time periods: slips from 1,669 audits completed in fiscal years 2010-2011 and 2011-2012 (2010-2012), and those from 360 audits completed between April and December 2015. ECA generated T-slip (i.e. T4 and T4A slips) data were analyzed to determine whether the Program’s calculation of federal tax results improved when compared to reassessed amounts.
4.1.1 The Program estimates its federal tax using assumptions that are based on optimal outcomes.
ECA auditors review employers’ books and records to verify that they have reported the correct employment income and payroll amounts. When auditors find income that was not reported, they include these amounts as “increases to income” on the appropriate T-slip (T4 for employees, T4A for self-employed contractors) and send them to be processed, thereby initiating a reassessment on the applicable T1 account. However, for purposes of program administration and monitoring, an estimate of federal tax related to the increase to income is calculated prior to reassessment of the T1 account based on the information available at that time. The following four Program-specific assumptions are used in the estimation of federal tax:
100% of the increases to income identified on a T4 slip has not already been reported by the employee;
60% of the increases to income identified on a T4A slip has not already been reported by the self-employed contractor;
all of the T-slips generated or amended by the Program will be processed and reassessed downstream; and
all of the T-slip recipients will be subject to a federal tax rate of 29% (the marginal tax rate at the time) on the full amount of increases to income assessed.
The results from testing each of these assumptions are summarized below.
The assumption that 100% of the increases to income identified on a T4 slip have not been reported by the employee has been found to be based on an unattainable ideal. Although reassessments on employment income almost always equalled the T4 increases to income amounts, there were sometimes secondary changes that partially offset the increase. For example, when taxpayers were converted from self-employed to employed status, amounts that had been reported as self-employment income by the individual would have been converted to employment income, but would not have generated additional taxes as calculated by the Program. Therefore, increases to the federal tax were often less than the Program estimated based on the increase to employment income. For fiscal years ending in 2011 and 2012, approximately 20% of the increases to income on T4 slips were offset by credits to self-employed income on the T1 account, and so the associated expected federal tax would not have been reassessed. These findings remained when analyzing 2015 audit results.
The Program’s second assumption is that 60% of the increases to income identified on a T4A slip have not been reported by a self-employed contractor. However, data analysis found that self-employed contractors consistently reported the majority of their income even without a T4A slip. As a result, in the 2010-2012 fiscal years, 13% of the total determined increases to income on T4A slip amounts were reassessed and this percentage increased to 17% in the April and December 2015 period. While these findings suggest that the Program is improving in identifying non-compliance, they also illustrate that this assumption remains an optimistic estimate.
As a result of the findings from the first two assumptions, it follows that the third assumption, that all T-slips are processed and reassessed, would be unlikely. A comparison of the 2010-2012 and more recent 2015 data suggest that approximately four-fifths of the T4 slips generated by the Program resulted in reassessments. The primary reason why the remaining slips had not been reassessed was that the income found on them had already been reported by the employee, which affects the validity of the Program’s second assumption.
Analysis of ECA generated T4A slips also shows that approximately one-quarter of those generated in the 2010-2012 periods was reassessed. PROTECTED
However, given that reassessed T4A slips result in 17% of federal tax amounts calculated by the Program, the decision to invest auditor hours in this activity may not be the most cost-effective approach.
Finally, the assumption that increases to each individual’s income would be taxed at a federal tax rate of 29% (the years’ highest tax bracket) also contributed to the Program estimating higher federal tax results than was reassessed by the Agency (see figure 3). To illustrate the point, during the 2010-2012 period, only 11.0% of taxpayers affected by ECA generated reassessments fell into the highest tax bracket, while almost 18% fell into the lowest tax bracket, resulting in a weighted average federal tax rate of 24.9% for T4 slip recipients. The weighted average federal tax rate was also lower than 29% in the more recent period, coming in at 23.3%. For T4A slip recipients, the average tax rate for the earlier period was 22.6%, increasing to 24% for T4A slip recipients more recently.
4.2 Collectability of fiscal impact resulting from ECA generated reassessments
4.2.1 Reversals are another factor effecting reassessed ECA results.
The CRA provides taxpayers with the opportunity to file a formal Notice of Objection and appeal assessments which they disagree with, or when they think the law has been incorrectly applied.
According to Appeals branch representatives, the objections workload resulting from the ECA Program is summarized for 2014-2015 below:
Approximately 3,400 objections to ECA related reassessments were submitted representing Appeals’ 4.4% of total intake of objections for the fiscal year.
67% of the ECA objections that were disposed were allowed in full or in part in the favour of the taxpayer.
These concerns have persisted. In the five year period between 2011 and 2016:
Over 9,700 objections were processed, 83% of which were allowed in full or in part.
The total tax involved in the ECA Program triggered objections was $55 million. Out of this total, 64% has been reversed.
These findings are likely a result of the systemic difference in level of analysis between the two programs. Recall that the ECA Program typically audits PROTECTED employers per year, but that these audits can impact the taxes of thousands of individual employees. It should be noted that while the Appeals data tracks the number of T1 objections resulting from the ECA Program, it does not currently link those objections to specific cases. This means that it remains unknown whether the 3,400 objections came from one or multiple audited employers. An attempt to do this was made for objections resulting from ECA audits conducted between April and December 2015. As of the end of September 2016 there was $5.6 million in disputed reassessments filed by 388 individual taxpayers affected by an ECA audit. Once these individuals were linked back to their employers, it was found that the disputed amounts were generated by PROTECTED of the audit cases completed during the period. It should be noted that this provides only a partial picture of the downstream impact on Appeals, as objections can take time to process.
This one-to-many aspect of ECA audits may also partially explain why the ECA Program and Appeals differ on the breadth of information required to complete their respective work. Recall that ECA auditors are mandated to gather information from employers as it is the employer’s responsibility to have records supporting the taxable benefit amounts provided to their employees. Meanwhile, the Appeals Branch deals directly with, and typically requires audit information from, every taxpayer in order to respond to each individual. The different point of interaction between the two programs has two main consequences:
The likelihood of an auditor relying on a sample of employee files increases with the number of employees in an organization. While Appeals also does quantum negotiations (i.e. apply a decision to a group based on review of a sample) for high volumes of like-cases, only 7% of disposals of objections to ECA related adjustments were quantum negotiated in the 2014-2015 fiscal year.
Appeals may receive information from employees that was not made available to the ECA auditor at the time of the audit. ECA auditors noted examples where employers were not able to provide logbooks, which are supposed to be kept by employees to track the private and business uses of a motor vehicle for the purposes of calculating auto-standby charges, only to have the employees provide the logbooks to Appeals after the audit adjustments were processed. Since the evidence is produced for the objection, procedure requires the Appeals Branch to consider it in its review of the case, and in these cases it often ends in a partial or full reversal of the reassessment from audit.
It is systemic differences such as these that tend to explain the reversals of ECA generated reassessments by the Appeals program.
To address these findings, both ECA and Appeals HQ are working on implementing a feedback loop initiative which would provide more detail and qualitative information on the facts of cases (i.e. type of disposal, variance, etc.). While this appears to be a positive step, these findings point to systemic differences between the two programs that, at the time of writing, are not yet addressed.
The following table represents the amount of federal tax reversed after reassessments in the 2010-2012 and April-December 2015 periods. As noted in Table 3, in the 2010-2012 period, 30% of federal tax from reassessments was reversed by Appeals. The amounts recorded for the more recent years is based on disputed tax compared to the federal tax calculated by the Program rather than what was reassessed, as there had not been sufficient time for the processes to conclude at the time of writing.
4.3 Challenges and barriers related to program delivery
The ECA Program faces other external (4.3.1) and internal challenges (4.3.2) that impact the Agency’s effectiveness and efficiency in enforcing employer payroll compliance.
4.3.1 External challenges
Non-compliance can occur for a variety of reasons, some of which may be deliberate. While some ECA auditors indicated that the majority of detected non-compliance was a result of misinformation/ misunderstanding of the tax law, including employers disagreeing with what the Agency deemed as “reasonable”, many believed that some employers would wilfully not comply so that their businesses remain competitive.
Findings from the consultation with payroll practitioners corroborated these comments as participants cited “organizational culture” (25%) and “boss/senior management” (18%) as among the key factors hindering their ability to report taxable benefits accurately or to properly characterize a worker. Combined, one-third (34%) of the payroll practitioners selected one of these options or both.
Demographic analysis revealed that these representatives were disproportionately:
from public administration, utilities, arts, entertainment and recreation and education services industry sectors;  
employed in larger organizations (33%) compared with those from smaller organizations (fewer than 20 employees) (20%);  and,
likely to report to a payroll supervisor/manager (62%), followed by either a VP Accounting/ Finance (38%). The founder/principal of the company and/or the CEO received the lowest percentage (22%).
4.3.2 Internal challenges and barriers
The internal challenges faced by the ECA Program have been classified in two ways:
challenges in the communication and support between HQ and the field; and
resources provided for the program.
4.3.2.1 On balance, the Program renewal addressed some concerns previously faced by the Program, but gaps in support still exist/remain.
Prior to 2012, ECA auditors were dispersed across TSOs where they reported to team leaders (TLs) who were accountable for multiple program areas. Considering the relatively smaller size of the ECA Program compared to other programs, TLs under this structure did not develop the specialized expertise required to support their ECA program staff and as a result there was a lack of consistency in program delivery across regional offices. Between 2012 and 2014 the Program went through a renewal which centralized regional management and staff with the aim of:
providing consistency in file quality;
providing consistency in performance management; and
enhancing communications and developing a sense of community among ECA auditors.
Those in both HQ and the regions indicated improvements in the program. Specifically, it was recognized that renewal allowed for dedicated TLs to develop program specific expertise which enable them to better support their staff. Having dedicated TLs also made it easier for HQ to identify what people are working on and to provide a consistent national approach. The result is the creation of the National Strategic Objectives (NSOs) which requires regions to plan 30% of their audit inventory over a three-year period on criteria specified by HQ. The purpose of the NSO was to create some degree of consistency in file selection across all regions. It has succeeded in focusing regional efforts on common sectors or risk indicators and encouraged the ECA Program to diversify its coverage beyond the industries they traditionally focused on, thereby decreasing the risk of non-compliance among the non-targeted industries.
The renewal also succeeded in improving consistency in performance management across the regions. HQ provides the field with monthly reports on the progress and budget utilization in each of the regions, which allows regions to compare their progress and adapt their regional work plans accordingly.
Although the renewal was supposed to provide improved file quality across all regions, data from the Quality Assurance Section (QAS), reveal that the renewal has, at the time of the writing of the report, had limited, if any, improvement of file quality across the regions.
While the Program has largely centralized its audit function within the regions, it has not done so in HQ. It is noteworthy that different officials are accountable for the communications, technical inquiries and training functions in support of the ECA Program, areas where the following challenges emerged across all regions:
Challenges remain with respect to enhancing communications and developing a sense of community.  HQ now communicates directly with dedicated team leaders on a monthly and ad hoc basis to inform them about changes to the ECA Program. However, HQ messages do not appear to be as well understood by auditors as they were intended. PROTECTED Furthermore, ECA staff in the field felt they were not fully consulted with respect to the development of NSOs. This poses concerns for the auditors who felt that the NSOs acted as barriers to their ability to reach their goals. HQ continues to consult regional management teams on NSO development, and believe that they do not pose a significant difficulty to the regions’ meeting their targets given they work out to be just 10% of results per year (30% spread out over three years). Another concern emerged with respect to the sense of community amongst ECA auditors. While those physically in the same office as their team leaders did not raise it, those in remote offices stated that at times they felt isolated. It was also found that region-to-region communication is limited, with few instances of collaboration or sharing of best practices between team leaders. This gap in regional coordination has left some inconsistencies in program procedures, particularly in the way issuance of T4A slips is understood and handled.  
Responsiveness to technical inquiries. HQ also provides field support on technical advice and clarification of issues identified in the field. A national electronic mailbox has been established to respond to regional inquiries. However, HQ indicated that it is infrequently used and regional officials corroborated that they seldom used it, citing concerns around the timeliness of the information provided. It was also noted that there is no mechanism for auditors to receive feedback on or track the status of their requests to this mailbox. The current process requires ECA auditors to contact their team leaders who, in the event that they cannot provide a response to the enquiry, are responsible for escalating the enquiry to HQ through a specified mailbox. HQ then informs the necessary areas (e.g. ITRD in the LPRAB), which have service standards typically ranging from 60 to 90 days. For example, auditors noted concern with the 60 day turnaround time to get rulings on the proper characterization of workers. The concern in the field stems from the risk of losing out on adjustments as a result of statute barred dates. In response CVB and CPP/EI Rulings have agreed on faster processing times (31 days) in cases where there are extenuating circumstances including approaching statute barred dates. HQ’s response time is further impacted by the level of complexity of the enquiries and the ambiguity of some of the rules and policies. Taken together, representatives from each region indicated that they tend to rely on the advice of colleagues, initiating contact with HQ only when necessary. Finally, most regions suggested that implementing regional technical advisors as part of the Program would be beneficial.  
ECA auditors require more timely training. While interviewed auditors noted that they receive relevant training, concern was raised with respect to its timeliness. Regions are accountable for the delivery of in-class training, which tends to be provided when the number of new hires reaches a critical mass, and a trainer is available. Online support was viewed as lacking in some key areas. PROTECTED A review of the data identified a need for further training on how to properly key results and follow audit procedure.
4.3.2.2 Summary and recommendation
The following factors were identified as challenges to ECA Program delivery:
Timeliness of training for new employees;
Communications between HQ and field, and cross-region communication; and
Timely responses to technical and legislative enquiries, which may result in the premature closure of an audit nearing its statute bar dates.
The above findings resulted in the following recommendation:
ECA Program addresses the timeliness and coordination of its support, training, and communication functions in order to improve consistency and responsiveness to the field.
Management response
We concur with this recommendation. The support provided to field operations is an important contributor to the success of the employer compliance audit program. The function is currently well positioned to provide the needed support through the PLRS that responds to technical questions and a newly formed, dedicated, field support team that is part of the Business Compliance Directorate.  Where necessary, these Headquarters teams are able to seek the support of the CRA ruling functions and the advice of Justice Canada when issues are beyond their expertise. HQ seeks to keep these teams staffed to the level necessary to provide the support the field needs, recognizing the knowledge needed on the part of the section is quite specialized.
At the time of the program evaluation, employer compliance audit and trust accounts examination were consolidated and reporting to one manager in HQ. After the reorganization and realignment in April 2016, employer compliance audit has a dedicated HQ manager with a field support team that is well positioned to provide the requisite support, communication and responsiveness to field enquiries.
Communication with the field is undertaken through regular calls with the regional programs advisors, semi-annual Operations Committee Meetings held in Ottawa, ad hoc meetings with program staff as well as the presence of headquarters staff and management in the regions. Improvements to communications are always a priority to the program and options to increase the availability of information on the status of requests from the field will be examined.  While the development of training products is the responsibility of the program, the provision of training is a regional responsibility for which they are resourced.
Timelines:
Institute a process for monitoring queries received from the field – Q4 2016-2017.
Inform field staff of the status of their enquiries; such as reasons for delays, escalation to PLRS or LPRAB by Q4 2016-2017.
Collaborate with CVB learning services section to ensure requisite ECA training products (taxable benefit training product is currently under technical review as well as a team leader training product) are updated and released to field staff – Q2 2017-2018. 
Monitor, through the use of quarterly reports, the timeliness of responses to the field – Q1 2017-2018.
Acknowledgement
We would first like to thank all our CRA colleagues that we interviewed, and in particular the ECA field and HQ staff, who from coast to coast spoke to us about the Program they are so passionate about. We would also like to thank the management team of the Canadian Payroll Association for their professionalism and insights as well as its 1,597 members who took the time to thoughtfully complete our survey. We also want to recognize the support we received from Public Affairs Branch in obtaining approvals and managing the survey contract in a responsive fashion. Finally, we are indebted to the data analysis team whose knowledge, energy, and patience provided us with extraordinary value from start to finish.
Appendix 1: Glossary of terms
Appendix 2 - Example of a Statement of Remuneration Paid (T4 slip)
Image description

A T4 slip with the title “Statement of Remuneration Paid” showing all blank fields, such as Employer’s name, employee’s name and address, Year, and box numbers from 14 to 56. You have to fill out a T4 slip to report employment income, taxable benefits or allowances, and deductions withheld during the year (i.e. CPP/QPP contributions, EI premiums).
Appendix 3 - Example of a Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income (T4A Slip)
Image description

A T4A slip with the title “Statement of Pension, Retirement, Annuity, and Other Income” showing all blank fields, such as Payer’s name, Recipient’s name and address, Year, and box numbers from 12 to 61. You have to fill out a T4A slip to report self-employed commissions and fees or other amounts for services.
Page details
Report a problem on this page







Date modified:
2017-01-27
